From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman
hosted by Carl Franklin. This is
Morris Ryan announcing show number
61 recorded Thursday, April 19,
2007. Support for Hansel minutes
is provided by Tellerik already
controls the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal. The world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott discusses with
guests. Chris sells the impact
of the last 15 years
of software Scott Hanselman. And
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. Carl Franklin has the
week off and I am
sitting here in the den
computer room of inequity with
Chris cells. Chris says I
just called my office, but
from now on, I will
be calling it my computer
room of iniquity. So we
were chatting earlier about what
we would talk about, and
we had the idea that
we would talk about where
is software and Microsoft going
to go in the next
15 years? And you had
a better idea to talk
about what we'd done in
the last 15 years as
a kind of a prequel
or prelude to the first
discussion. So 15 years ago
was what? 92? Yeah, 92.
What would, well, I remember
in 92, that's when I
took a essential comm from
Don box. And after that
I was within a couple
of months I was teaching.
And I remember that being
a hole where you had
just come off the, what
was the name of that
silly architecture, where we had
the thing in the middle
and not know it was
in before DNA. There was
this, Oh, this like TAPI
was an example of this,
where we have a Tappy
deal and you program your
apps against it. And then
you have the provider API
underneath and Microsoft provided the
thing in the middle and
it was like, Whoa. So,
or I don't even remember
what they called it, but
some are windows unified software,
something like that. And we,
and now we can just
move from that into component
based software. And that, I
remember that being a huge
idea, the idea that we
had binary components, that we
could build reusability into our
software and use it across
languages. Now that actually had
some, I mean, that wasn't
just talk, we could, we
could almost actually do that.
I, I remember 92, 93,
I was working at a
place that did car parts
cataloging, and people would say,
I have a, you know,
an 85 Caprice or whatever.
And I want to a
fax with all the parts
on it. And we had
this huge database, many, many
megabytes inside. Yes, many megabytes
SQL four to five or
four to one or something
like that. And a and
T was just in beta
Mt. Three five, Three, five
three five one. That was
the era W when component-based
software kind of blew me
away was then when it
came time for us to
generate the facts, we automated
word cause word six had
come out. Oh, sure, sure,
sure, sure. We ran this
visual basic app on the
server side that would listen
to the facts. You know,
we had like a digital
board or whatever, you know,
call to come in. We
had a fax farm. Yes.
But we had this server
with 16 megabytes of Ram
that would automate all these
copies of, of word and
build from the database, you
know, for each car. And
we built these giant word
docs and then fax them.
Wow. And it was word
software as a service, you
know, and word is, I
know to this, even to
this day, people still try
to build websites that generate
Excel spreadsheets by automating Excel
on the back end, which
does not work at all.
And in fact has spawned
a whole mini industry within
a component industry for just
components that generate Excel compatible
files. Yeah. I just make
a, was an XML spreadsheet
format. Yep. But you're right.
That, that kind of has
become the, the exact wrong
thing to do Local example,
but people do it all
the time. So, so I
look at the technology by
how easy it is, how
powerful the technology is, is
how easy it is to
build the bad thing that
still works. And so the
beauty of component-based software is
that you could build something
that would just a terrible
architecture, right. That you could
automate Excel on this audit
and a heavy multi-user system.
And it would sort of
almost sometimes work. And it
was the whole idea of
binary components that enable that
Wouldn't that mean that, that,
that.net is making it just
that much easier to do
stupid stuff. Absolutely. Absolutely. But
what about the pit of
success? Right? I mean, Rico
Mariani says allow them to
fall into the pit of
success, make your systems such
that even if they screw
up, it still turns out.
Okay. And I guess that's
so much better way to
say what I say right.
Which is even if you
write something that's not optimal
or even approaching optimal, you
can still solve your problem.
Well, enough to move on.
Right there, there are two
kinds of computer people, right.
There are the computer people
like you and I, and
probably most of your listeners
that are unhealthy about their
love of computers, right. That
they obsess over writing good
code. And that, that has
a meaning to them. Right.
Right. The purity for purity's
sake. Right. And these are
the people that look at
an architecture, they look at
code and they don't even,
they don't even think about
it anymore. They just have
this person's style coastal. Right.
They can feel the quality
or not, and they keep
working on it. I, I
can feel the quality so
much that I know now
it's been 10 years since
I've written some decent code,
really like my sense of
code smell is so highly
advanced coats. I cannot write
any good code at all.
I am incapable of writing
code. I'll write like four
lines and I'll just go,
Oh yeah. But what if
someone used, what if someone
use this line of code
at 2:00 AM the moment, the
date, you know, the DST
says, Oh, it'll never work
in Sri Lanka, you know? And
then, Well, so there again,
we had, I applied my
success as a metric thing.
Exactly. So, so, you know,
we are unhealthy in our
love of the computer code.
Right. And then there's most
of the programming population, the
people that actually have business
problems to solve and they
solve them and they install
and deploy and support the
systems and move on with
their lives and their business
makes money as a result
of that. Exactly. Right. Didn't
tell them pagers go off.
Of course. So I slept
pretty well 15 years ago.
Well, we had a system,
It worked really well. There
you go. And right. And
you had cobbled together these
pieces and it was, it
was this binary component, object
model thing that enabled it.
So that bind your components,
big thing. And of course
the binary component kind of
in the abstract and the
power of that was the
clemency Persky book, that component
book. Do you remember the
title of that book? That
well, so the, the reason
I bring that up is
because Clemons is on my
team now that it's kind
of fun. It's kind of
fun. He's a good guy.
He's really like that. Yeah.
He's fun to work with
Your climate, you know? Well,
except I also work with
Chris Anderson Don box. Yeah.
So I could spend a
lot of time there. Yeah.
Is that just kind of
wide-eyed Clem masters works around
the hall from me. I
run into all the time.
I mean, you know, there's
a lot of that two
Clemens on one floor. Yes.
In fact, the only two
Clemens in all of Microsoft
work in the same corner
of the same building. Wow.
Okay. So binary objects, that
was a big deal, right?
92. So what else since
then, Graphical stuff. I mean,
Hey, you and your secretary
can write an application. You
just drag a button onto
a form. I would say
the, the Allen Cooper style
drag and drop UI design,
that the, what you see
is what you get for
application developers. That was huge.
Right. Visual basic one. Oh.
And on MRC class was
absolutely the dialogue editor and
MFC. And you could go
back and forth between that
and your code. But I'd
say that probably the best
example of that is really
the WinForms designer. I'm a,
I'm in love with that.
I am, I'm not a
big fan of that. I
always got frustrated when I
would do something. I go
and edit the you're not
supposed to edit this part
to get the big kind
of like red icon. Yeah.
Big red X. Yes, absolutely.
And of course, so what
I was going to say
is I'm not a fan
of the serialization format they
chose, which looks an awful
lot like C-sharp or VB,
but isn't Right. Well, yeah.
And so, So, you know,
as I look forward, I
see a better serialization format.
Yeah, absolutely. But which makes
me feel like we've just
come back to 15 years
ago. It's just now they're
dot XAML files, not dot
RC files. Sure. I'd say
that's true. Although I think
the young folks, the young
kids today don't know that
the young people Well, and
of course, you know, that
RC files are just the
same as HTML files, which
are the same as however
we differ. Well, I screamed,
which was the same as
a 32, 72 70, the
web has 32 70 example
has been the ongoing thing
for me. Absolutely. Here we
are. Remoting UI again. Now
we're going all the way
back to the chubby client.
Again, The reason I went
yeah, agreed, agreed. Well, JavaScript
is a lousy computational engine.
Let's really be seriousness time
and let's, let's enable some
managed code on the client,
but make it less difficult
to get the runtime Light
is definitely a graphics. Cross-platform
high performance, high fidelity graphics,
video. Yeah. GDI specific to
D but it's still all.
Oh yeah. But well, they
still all JavaScript driven on
the client. Well, no, it's
JavaScript driven to get the
information in and out of
it from the Dom, from
the HTML Dom into an
into Silverlight and back. But,
but in may, in March
or may of 2006, Mike
harsh the PM for several
light on his blog said
that it will have managed
code support. So it's become
a tiny little, is that
the case in the one
old version? That's, that's what
everyone's speculating will happen next
week. Next, you know, I
can't say either way, we
just did it. Our last
show was on Silverlight. Sure.
So Paul Wilson Wilson's dot net
had basically combed through every
interview. That's got goo every
day, you know, analyze the
ums and the AHS. And
everyone believes that there's some
kind of managed runtime next
week. That's happening inside of
several lights to enable C
sharp in the browser on
a Mac. So I have
In my WPF book, an
appendix written by Sean will
remove on dev on Silverlight
WPP. Yeah. Sean fan, I've
been trying to get them
hired at Microsoft forever. Anyway,
That's what I do with
all my friends. Haven't I
tried to get you. Okay.
So We have a silver
light appendix in our book
because it's the XAML part
and the graphics part, it's
very much a subset of
WPE WPF that. Right. But
there's nothing about managed runtime
on the client, in that,
in that chat appendix, is
that chapter gone to print?
No one has it then
maybe. No, I have no
idea. And we definitely are.
All I know is getting
our eyes opened. Yeah. That's
what they intended. That's what
my car, and I'm not
saying anything that hasn't been
printed. So my point being
though that whether it's JavaScript
or whether it's C-sharp, it
doesn't matter. The point is
that there's all these penny
and fours out there not
doing any freaking work they're
waiting around for angle brackets
to show up so they
can do something with them.
For the most part, my
CPU is largely idol. I
mean, basically my CPU does
two things. It waits for
web pages to show up
so it can show them
to me and it makes
thumbnails. So it's an explore.
Those are the two things
that my CPU does. It's
funny because I, Why aren't
we using the web as
a big, why aren't, why
aren't web applications more of
the kind of distributed computation
farm kind of a thing.
So I, I absolutely, I
definitely do serve two websites.
Right? I do. I mean,
I look up  I
surf the web. Absolutely. You
heard it here first. I
searched for information on the
web, but I'll tell you
more and more. I mean,
I live and breathe the
real outlook, right? Not the
web outlook. I spend all
my time in various copies
of visual studio, sometimes two,
three at a time word,
PowerPoint, Connected applications, you're saying,
but they're outside the browser
frame. They own their own
frame. Yes. And they take
advantage of the operating system
platform so much. So in
fact that I just got,
I had to order some
new memory for my life.
Well, let me give you
an example. Like someone said
on an alias recently that
they were frustrated that they
have to upgrade to the
latest version of QuickBooks. Cause
the older versions weren't supported
on Vista and another guy
said, well, Hey, I just
use the QuickBooks web version
and 92%, well, you know,
the same and every once
in a while you'll be
using it. And you'll think
that it's the real desktop
version and you, Oh, wait
a second. I'm on the
web. It's that good? Wow.
But the benefit, you know,
the 8% that you lose
and these are just kind
of nonsense numbers, but the
little few percent you lose
is outweighed by the fact
that his accountant can log
in any machines and manages
You definitely see benefits in
a connected app. So what
are the benefits of a
connected app versus an an
a non-connected app? The only
difference is then distribution. When
you visit with an IRL
and one, you install from
an MSI. So even today
with, well, for awhile now
with click wands and wind
farms and WPF, would you
visit with the neuro and
now with Silverlight with the
rich stuff inside the browser
window, the very enriched stuff.
Yeah. They've even, you know,
before with flash, but the
no touch, no touch deploy
was largely kind of a
0.9 release. And people got
frustrated with it, right. Once
is the one I'll click
once works pretty well. I've
written a number of them
until you get into certificate
revocation problems. There's a pretty,
if you're, if your certificate,
then you're kind of screwed
and that's a known bug.
Sure. I mean, it's, it's
there and it's closed, but
you know, office as click
once app. Yeah. I Don't
know what I'm saying. That'd
be pretty sweet. So my
mission about surfing the web
before was making, yes, there's
a bunch of apps that
I use, you know, 60
seconds at a time, all
day long. But if I
have to spend more than
five minutes in an app,
I can't stand the web
app that I just, I'm
such a keyboard guy and
I'm sorry, windows, UI guy.
And without that, I, I
can't use an app. It
drives me crazy. It really
does. And so that's why
I'll use, Oh, Woah only
on computers that I occasionally
outlook web access, simply because
it's there and I can
use it for five minutes
to check my email quick,
late for something or whatever.
But then I close it
down and I go to
my real COVID couldn't you
live in Gmail actually. Gmail.
No, but I'll tell ya.
I probably could live in
Yahoo mail when I say
control and in Yahoo mail,
it works Yahoo mail. Well,
I think they bought odd
posts. They did come. They
did. They totally did. Yeah.
And so I just have
it, a little experimental email
address over there and I
like that email client a
lot more than g-mail really?
Yes, yes. Okay. So let's
go back onto the, so
the WinForms designer, the reason
it's, it's kind of the
physical so far. And in
fact, if you look at
the WPF designer so far
in the developer space cider,
I'm just waiting for it
to get to the same
bar set by the windows.
Desirable cider is, Oh, sorry.
Cider is the WPF designer.
That's inside of visual studio.
Right? So when you install
the WPF extensions, the visual
studio or the stuff that'll
come with orcas orcas already
comes with even a better
side or that comes with
right. That came. How many
different SAML editors are there
now? There's expression, blend and
design there's. Yes. And then
there's also, some folks have
been building output filters for
like Adobe and things like
that. There. Thank you. That's
a company name, not an
application name. Thank you for
filling that in for me,
there was the cider one
built into visual studio. XAML
pad or something. Oh, well
there's seven XAML pads and
don't tell me you write
it in notepad. I don't
write it in notepad because
I need the IntelliSense. I
write it in the XML
editor in visual studio. Okay.
So it's less important that
you have a preview for
you and more important that
you have IntelliSense. Absolutely. Now
with HTML, I remember remember
here. So think about this,
right? So 92, what was
the most difficult thing to
do? Like what was the
pinnacle? It was riding an
HTML table without looking at
the, with the hell. Yup.
Was like, Oh, an HTML
is great. It's so intuitive.
Except I really wish I
could write a table. So
front page existed only for
the purposes of allowing people
to make really complicated tables
with call spans and those
bands with all the properties
in the property browsers. And
in fact, it's funny too,
because again, the what made,
front-page interesting that it had
this kind of Wiziwig develop.
You draw what you see
is what you get UI
design environment. I remember, of
course, in word, the first
thing they had the table
painter. Yes, yes, yes. And
you could erase the little
lines. Are you anticipating that
people that are going to
just get over it at
some point and when it
comes to basic UI stuff,
they're going to write them
themselves and not the polylines
and stuff. No, I don't.
I am an oddity in
the XAML world. Well, in
many ways I'm an oddity,
but in this particular case,
yes, everyone that I know
that's written, the XAML book
is able to be very
productive in the raw yeah.
Three people on the planet
who care to do that.
But most people use expression
or use Exactly. Right. That's
exactly, exactly what I anticipated.
But the beauty of see,
this is the huge difference
between XAML and WinForms designer
and why it is a
big staff is if I
go and edit the XAML,
I can have a reasonable
assurance that the editor, the
designers, visual designers will understand
it. Whereas with code, as
you point out, it's very
likely that they won't As
a shortest side, are there,
are there buttons and controls
and stuff? They're buttons, if
you know there aren't, so
you don't get any of
those things. Don't want a
button you drive. And in
fact, one of the things
we talked about in our
appendix The purpose, yes. Is
it on purpose? It's all
about what is the minimal
environment we can build. We
can provide to people to
build rich, interactive application, But
not full screen. You know,
Silverlight application takes over the
entire browser. You have two
choices, right? And we cover
both of these in the
appendix because they're both important
models. One is you can,
you know, use it as
a little islands of XAML
in your HTML and use
the regular HTML controls. And,
you know, you can have
an HTML button for pause
and play and rewind for
your videos. Right? The other
thing you can do is
you can actually, of course
you can, from the graphics
primitives and the interactive primitives,
they provide the event mouse
and keyboard event handling. You
can build things that look
like buttons and work like
buttons, and you have the
styling and XAML, and you
have the graphics control. And,
and in fact, you can
even package them in little
reusable, things that you serve
up from your web server.
Okay. So like the one
thing about HTML that I've
always hated is tables, right?
Sure. So tables as layout
has largely been a solved
problem because Gibbs and CSS,
but tables as places to
put data still exist, right?
The only purpose for a
table is for tabular data.
Sure. But I have this
kind of weird idea in
my head that somehow Silverlight
is going to replace that.
I just want the ultimate
grid in Silverlight. So then
I'll have dibs for everything.
And then I'll, there's still,
the hacker had a better
layout forms. So what you're
saying is that one of
two things, one, you look
for a future versions of
silver to have a much
richer set of controls built
with silver light. And I
think that's what I wouldn't
say that just the first
guy to ride a really
awesome grid or enterprising third-parties
Microsoft has made room for
enterprising third it's. Absolutely. Yeah.
And in fact, by far
and away, the coolest WPF
control that I've seen is
the, the free exceed data
grip control, interestingly enough. And
that's total coincidence, although people
won't think so they were
a sponsor of this podcast
for awhile and they are,
if you go into my
homepage enhancement.com, they're the big
black advertisement under my, under
my huge head. I didn't
know that Honestly, but yeah.
They're, they're awesome. Those guys
are. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. So,
so anyway, so mainline again.
Okay. So the visual drawing
of things, was he with
you on one of the
things actually, as an aside,
one of the really cool
things about Chris, as long
as I've known him, he
has the ability to push
things on the stack and
pop them off and get
right back to where, you
know, you never hear Chris
go, what was I talking
about? He immediately just goes,
pop, pop, pop, and he's
right back where it was
please. Okay. Well that's I
never knew that about myself,
but after all that instructor,
I think that's what it
was. All the teachings. You
went off into a tangent
and come back. Yeah. Because
the tangents are the fun
part. Right? My on my,
on the other hand, I've
completely forgotten why I'm here.
Not at, I have no
clue. That's funny too, because
when you do that in
regular conversations, if you, I
have had to learn to
not pop a regular conversation
back to cause they really,
once they're off in Lala
land, then following their rent,
they don't want to be
pulled back. That's right. They've
had that conversation now they're
moving on. Yes. I've had,
that's been a problem. In
fact, that thing you pointed
out. So anyway, so before
92, I would have said
that as an older Unix
and Mac programmer, the only
thing I liked me, only
thing I liked about windows
3.1 was the programming environment.
Assuming I could ignore the
silly, you know, low, medium,
high memory, whatever it was
because not only did I
really like the program model,
these are 32 when compared
to units in the Mac
for UIs, but they had
the most amazing thing that
changed, transformed my programming life.
They had F one, I
remember programming without effluent and
then finding F one, it
was like manna from heaven
that changed my programming lights
for formats. And tell us
that. Definitely. And then, so
in the 92 or after
that, that's when isn't that,
when we started getting IntelliSense,
I mean, when did we
get that VB? So I
was never, I tried programming
visual basic several times as
a comp program. Right. I
had starting in VB four,
VB five right now. And
I subsequently I've learned why
without the subclass thing, I
just can't factor my code
properly. So that's why I
could never be a VB
six or below programmer. Right.
Right. Because the, the, the,
the comfortable, we're not quite
object oriented. We're hiding because
the entire purpose, I said
this before the entire point
of visual, basic as a
language was to lie to
the developer and say, you
know, making, you know, don't
look behind the curtain comm
doesn't exist, blah, blah, blah.
I can't hear you. We'd
like to think of it
as a layer of abstraction
as opposed to lie. I
like to think of it
as the matrix. There you
go. Yes. Because what was
the first thing you wanted
to do when you were
a hardcore video programmers, call
Dan Appleman and get the
VBX message Cracker, right. It's
control and see, what's really
going on. Getting back to
the matrix analogy, the value
of visual basic is it
actually show you shows you
the blondes, brunettes and redheads,
as opposed to making you
imagine it though, you have
to C plus plus nice
matrix. So I would say
that IntelliSense and now I
am completely spoiled unless a
language or a data format
or whatever it is I
have to type has IntelliSense.
I reject it out of
hand. So you're not going
to go to Ruby and
tell this Ruby and tell
us exactly. Right. And you're
not ashamed to say that
with your coming out because
people think that program is
supposed to be hard squiggly
lines underneath my know. It's
hard enough to make it
work, let alone without, I
mean, the way I learn
how to program anything. Cause
there's so much functionality in
the world, right. I mean,
I'm a reflector if I
didn't have reflector, but forget
about it. I mean, reflectors.
Awesome. Oh yeah. Don't get
me wrong. And I hear,
I hear somebody in a
Microsoft meeting bring up the
reflector at least once an
hour. It just, it is
that useful a tool in
that prevalent. I was in
a review the other day
and Don said, I don't
want to see the code.
Just bring it up in
reflector. He just wanted to
see the right the wrong
way. So, so reflection is
a big deal, but reflector
there's. I was thinking about
this the other day, cause
I've been doing power scripts
a little bit PowerShell, PowerShell.
Thank you. There are so
many, there's so much existing
functionality on my box. If
I had some way to
list all of the DLL
calls I could make and
all of the duck, I
could call them and line
arguments and, and all of
the calm objects and all
of the.net classes and big
surface area, it's a huge
surface area. And so if
I'm going to navigate that
surface area, I want some
help. And the help, the
thing I do is I
go, well, I'm going to,
I think in system dot
networking is something I want.
So system that networking dot,
Oh wait, here's the thing.
And that's how I learned
. This is Lawrence Ryan tune
in next week for part
two of this discussion with
guest Chris cells right here,
.